Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.2
Array. Amechanically integrated assembly of modules or
ARTICLE 690 panelswithasupportstructureandfoundation,tracker,and
Solar Photovoltaic (PV) Systems other components, as required, to form a direct-current
power-producing unit.
I. General
690.1 Scope. The provisions of this article apply to solar Photovoltaic source circuits Inverter input circuit
Inverter output circuit
PVelectricalenergysystems,includingthearraycircuit(s),
inverter(s), and controller(s) for such systems. [See Figure Electric production
and distribution
690.1(a) and Figure 690.1(b).] Solar PV systems covered Photovoltaic output circuit network connection
by this article may be interactive with other electrical Inverter
Interactive system
power production sources or stand-alone, with or without
electrical energy storage such as batteries. These systems Wind, engine-generator,
may have ac or dc output for utilization. m ot i h c e ro r - p h o y w dr e o r - s e o le u c r t c r e ic s , and E an n d e r s g y y s s te to m ra c g o e n , t r c o h l arge controller,
Inverter input circuit
Photovoltaic source circuits Inverter output circuit
Photovoltaic
Photovoltaic
output circuit
output circuit
Fuses Hybrid system dc loads Inverter
Solar cells Charge controller
Inverter input circuit
Photovoltaic output
circuit Inverter output circuit
Main supply
equipment for
Module
ac loads
Inverter
Panel Main supply equipment
for dc loads
Stand-alone system Energy storage
Array or photovoltaic Notes:
power source 1. These diagrams are intended to be a means of identification for
photovoltaic system components, circuits, and connections.
2. Disconnecting means and overcurrent protection required by
Article 690, Part III, are not shown.
Dedicated branch circuit 3. System grounding and equipment grounding are not shown.
See Article 690, Part V.
of the electric production
4. Custom designs occur in each configuration, and some components
and distribution network
are optional.
Inverter output circuit
ac module (includes inverter) Figure 690.1(b) Identification of Solar Photovoltaic System
ComponentsinCommonSystemConfigurations.
Array (of ac modules)
ac module system
Notes: BipolarPhotovoltaicArray. APV array that has two out-
1. These diagrams are intended to be a means of identification for puts, each having opposite polarity to a common reference
photovoltaic system components, circuits, and connections.
2. Disconnecting means required by Article 690, Part III, are not shown. point or center tap.
3. System grounding and equipment grounding are not shown.
See Article 690, Part V. Blocking Diode. A diode used to block reverse flow of
current into a PV source circuit.
Figure 690.1(a) Identification of Solar Photovoltaic System
Components. BuildingIntegratedPhotovoltaics.Photovoltaiccells,de-
vices, modules, or modular materials that are integrated
690.2 Definitions. intotheoutersurfaceorstructureofabuildingandserveas
the outer protective surface of that building.
Alternating-Current (ac) Module (Alternating-Current
(cid:127)
Photovoltaic Module). A complete, environmentally pro- DC-to-DC Converter. Adevice installed in the PVsource
tected unit consisting of solar cells, optics, inverter, and circuit or PV output circuit that can provide an output dc
other components, exclusive of tracker, designed to gener- voltageandcurrentatahigherorlowervaluethantheinput
ate ac power when exposed to sunlight. dc voltage and current.
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–623

--- PAGE 1 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.3 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
Direct-Current (dc) Combiner. A device used in the PV Photovoltaic Output Circuit. Circuit conductors between
source and PV output circuits to combine two or more dc the PV source circuit(s) and the inverter or dc utilization
circuit inputs and provide one dc circuit output. equipment.
Diversion Charge Controller. Equipment that regulates Photovoltaic Power Source. An array or aggregate of ar-
raysthatgeneratesdcpoweratsystemvoltageandcurrent.
the charging process of a battery by diverting power from
energy storage to direct-current or alternating-current loads Photovoltaic Source Circuit. Circuits between modules
or to an interconnected utility service. and from modules to the common connection point(s) of
the dc system.
Electrical Production and Distribution Network. A
powerproduction,distribution,andutilizationsystem,such PhotovoltaicSystemVoltage.Thedirectcurrent(dc)volt-
as a utility system and connected loads, that is external to age of any PV source or PV output circuit. For multiwire
and not controlled by the PV power system. installations, the PV system voltage is the highest voltage
(cid:127) between any two dc conductors.
Interactive System. A solar PV system that operates in
Solar Cell. The basic PV device that generates electricity
parallelwithandmaydeliverpowertoanelectricalproduc-
when exposed to light.
tion and distribution network. For the purpose of this defi-
(cid:127)
nition, an energy storage subsystem of a solar PV system, Stand-Alone System. A solar PV system that supplies
such as a battery, is not another electrical production power independently of an electrical production and distri-
source. bution network.
Inverter.Equipmentthatisusedtochangevoltagelevelor Subarray. An electrical subset of a PV array.
waveform, or both, of electrical energy. Commonly, an in-
690.3 OtherArticles. Wherever the requirements of other
verter [also known as a power conditioning unit (PCU) or
articlesofthisCodeandArticle690differ,therequirements
power conversion system (PCS)] is a device that changes dc
ofArticle 690 shall apply and, if the system is operated in
input to an ac output. Inverters may also function as battery
parallel with a primary source(s) of electricity, the require-
chargers that use alternating current from another source and
ments in 705.14, 705.16, 705.32, and 705.143 shall apply.
convertitintodirectcurrentforchargingbatteries.
Exception: Solar PV systems, equipment, or wiring in-
Inverter Input Circuit. Conductors between the inverter
stalled in a hazardous (classified) location shall also com-
and the battery in stand-alone systems or the conductors
ply with the applicable portions of Articles 500 through
between the inverter and the PV output circuits for electri- 516.
cal production and distribution network.
690.4 General Requirements.
InverterOutputCircuit.Conductorsbetweentheinverter
and an ac panelboard for stand-alone systems or the con- (A) Photovoltaic Systems. Photovoltaic systems shall be
ductors between the inverter and the service equipment or permittedtosupplyabuildingorotherstructureinaddition
another electric power production source, such as a utility, to any other electrical supply system(s).
(cid:127)
for electrical production and distribution network.
(B) Equipment. Inverters, motor generators, PV modules,
Module. A complete, environmentally protected unit con- PVpanels,acPVmodules,dccombiners,dc-to-dcconvert-
sisting of solar cells, optics, and other components, exclu- ers, and charge controllers intended for use in PV power
sive of tracker, designed to generate dc power when ex- systems shall be listed for the PV application.
(cid:127)
posed to sunlight.
(C) Qualified Personnel. The installation of equipment
Monopole Subarray. APV subarray that has two conduc- andallassociatedwiringandinterconnectionsshallbeper-
tors in the output circuit, one positive (+) and one nega- formed only by qualified persons.
tive(−). Two monopole PV subarrays are used to form a
Informational Note: SeeArticle 100 for the definition of
bipolar PV array. qualifiedperson.
Multimode Inverter. Equipment having the capabilities of (D) MultipleInverters.APVsystemshallbepermittedto
both the utility-interactive inverter and the stand-alone in- have multiple inverters installed in or on a single building
verter. or structure.Where the inverters are remotely located from
each other, a directory in accordance with 705.10 shall be
Panel. A collection of modules mechanically fastened to-
installed at each dc PV system disconnecting means, at
gether,wired,anddesignedtoprovideafield-installableunit.
each ac disconnecting means, and at the main service dis-
70–624 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 2 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.7
connectingmeansshowingthelocationofallacanddcPV WhenthePVsystemalsohasbatteries,thesamewarn-
system disconnecting means in the building. ingshallalsobeappliedbytheinstallerinavisiblelocation
at the batteries. The warning sign(s) or label(s) shall com-
Exception: A directory shall not be required where all
ply with 110.21(B).
inverters and PV dc disconnecting means are grouped at
the main service disconnecting means.
690.6 Alternating-Current (ac) Modules.
690.5 Ground-Fault Protection. Grounded dc PV arrays (A) PhotovoltaicSourceCircuits.TherequirementsofAr-
shall be provided with dc ground-fault protection meeting ticle690pertainingtoPVsourcecircuitsshallnotapplytoac
the requirements of 690.5(A) through (C) to reduce fire modules. The PV source circuit, conductors, and inverters
hazards. Ungrounded dc PV arrays shall comply with shallbeconsideredasinternalwiringofanacmodule.
690.35.
(B) InverterOutput Circuit. The output of an ac module
Exception: Ground-mounted or pole-mounted PV arrays
shall be considered an inverter output circuit.
with not more than two paralleled source circuits and with
alldcsourceanddcoutputcircuitsisolatedfrombuildings
(C) Disconnecting Means. Asingle disconnecting means,
shall be permitted without ground-fault protection.
in accordance with 690.15 and 690.17, shall be permitted
(cid:127)
for the combined ac output of one or more ac modules.
(A) Ground-Fault Detection and Interruption. The Additionally, each ac module in a multiple ac module sys-
ground fault protection device or system shall: temshallbeprovidedwithaconnector,bolted,orterminal-
(1) Be capable of detecting a ground fault in the PV array type disconnecting means.
dc current-carrying conductors and components, in- (cid:127)
cluding any intentionally grounded conductors, (D) Overcurrent Protection. The output circuits of ac
(2) Interrupt the flow of fault current modules shall be permitted to have overcurrent protection
and conductor sizing in accordance with 240.5(B)(2).
(3) Provide an indication of the fault, and
(4) Be listed for providing PV ground-fault protection
II. Circuit Requirements
Automatically opening the grounded conductor for
measurement purposes or to interrupt the ground-fault cur-
690.7 Maximum Voltage.
rent path shall be permitted. If a grounded conductor is
opened to interrupt the ground-fault current path, all con- (A) Maximum Photovoltaic System Voltage. In a dc PV
ductors of the faulted circuit shall be automatically and source circuit or output circuit, the maximum PV system
simultaneously opened. voltageforthatcircuitshallbecalculatedasthesumofthe
Manual operation of the main PV dc disconnect shall rated open-circuit voltage of the series-connected PV mod-
not activate the ground-fault protection device or result in ulescorrectedforthelowestexpectedambienttemperature.
grounded conductors becoming ungrounded. For crystalline and multicrystalline silicon modules, the
ratedopen-circuitvoltageshallbemultipliedbythecorrec-
(B) Isolating Faulted Circuits. The faulted circuits shall tion factor provided in Table 690.7. This voltage shall be
be isolated by one of the two following methods: usedtodeterminethevoltageratingofcables,disconnects,
(1) The ungrounded conductors of the faulted circuit shall overcurrent devices, and other equipment. Where the lowest
be automatically disconnected. expected ambient temperature is below −40°C (−40°F), or
(2) The inverter or charge controller fed by the faulted where other than crystalline or multicrystalline silicon PV
circuit shall automatically cease to supply power to modules are used, the system voltage adjustment shall be
output circuits. madeinaccordancewiththemanufacturer’sinstructions.
When open-circuit voltage temperature coefficients are
(C) Labels and Markings. A warning label shall appear supplied in the instructions for listed PV modules, they
on the utility-interactive inverter or be applied by the in- shall be used to calculate the maximum PV system voltage
staller near the ground-fault indicator at a visible location, as required by 110.3(B) instead of using Table 690.7.
stating the following:
Informational Note: One source for statistically valid,
WARNING lowest-expected,ambienttemperaturedesigndataforvarious
locationsistheExtremeAnnualMeanMinimumDesignDry
ELECTRIC SHOCK HAZARD
BulbTemperature found in the ASHRAE Handbook — Fun-
IFAGROUND FAULT IS INDICATED,
damentals. These temperature data can be used to calculate
NORMALLYGROUNDED CONDUCTORS MAY maximumvoltageusingthemanufacturer’stemperaturecoef-
BE UNGROUNDEDAND ENERGIZED ficientsrelativetotheratingtemperatureof25°C.
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–625

--- PAGE 3 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.8 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
Table690.7 VoltageCorrectionFactorsforCrystallineand (2) Each circuit is connected to a separate subarray.
MulticrystallineSiliconModules
(3) The equipment is clearly marked with a label as
follows:
CorrectionFactorsforAmbientTemperaturesBelow25°C
(77°F).(Multiplytheratedopencircuitvoltagebythe
WARNING
appropriatecorrectionfactorshownbelow.)
BIPOLAR PHOTOVOLTAICARRAY.
Ambient Ambient DISCONNECTION OF NEUTRAL
Temperature(°C) Factor Temperature(°F) OR GROUNDED CONDUCTORS
MAYRESULT IN OVERVOLTAGE
24to20 1.02 76to68
ONARRAYOR INVERTER.
19to15 1.04 67to59
14to10 1.06 58to50 The warning sign(s) or label(s) shall comply with
9to5 1.08 49to41 110.21(B).
4to0 1.10 40to32
−1to−5 1.12 31to23
−6to−10 1.14 22to14 690.8 Circuit Sizing and Current.
−11to−15 1.16 13to5
−16to−20 1.18 4to−4 (A) Calculation of Maximum Circuit Current. The
−21to−25 1.20 −5to−13
maximumcurrentforthespecificcircuitshallbecalculated
−26to−30 1.21 −14to−22
−31to−35 1.23 −23to−31 in accordance with 690.8(A)(1) through (A)(5).
−36to−40 1.25 −32to−40
InformationalNote: Wheretherequirementsof690.8(A)(1)
and(B)(1)arebothapplied,theresultingmultiplicationfactor
is156percent.
(1) PhotovoltaicSourceCircuitCurrents.Themaximum
current shall be the sum of parallel module rated short-
(B) Direct-Current Utilization Circuits. The voltage of circuit currents multiplied by 125 percent.
dc utilization circuits shall conform to 210.6.
(2) Photovoltaic Output Circuit Currents. The maxi-
(C) Photovoltaic Source and Output Circuits. In one- mum current shall be the sum of parallel source circuit
and two-family dwellings, PV source circuits and PV out- maximum currents as calculated in 690.8(A)(1).
put circuits that do not include lampholders, fixtures, or
(3) Inverter Output Circuit Current. The maximum
receptacles shall be permitted to have a maximum PV sys-
current shall be the inverter continuous output current
tem voltage up to 600 volts. Other installations with a
rating.
maximumPVsystemvoltageover1000voltsshallcomply
withArticle 690, Part IX.
(4) Stand-Alone Inverter Input Circuit Current. The
maximum current shall be the stand-alone continuous in-
(D) Circuits over150Volts to Ground. In one- and two-
verter input current rating when the inverter is producing
family dwellings, live parts in PV source circuits and PV
rated power at the lowest input voltage.
output circuits over 150 volts to ground shall not be acces-
sible to other than qualified persons while energized. (5) DC-to-DC Converter Output Current. The maxi-
InformationalNote: See110.27forguardingofliveparts, mum current shall be the dc-to-dc converter continuous
and210.6forvoltagetogroundandbetweenconductors. output current rating.
(E) BipolarSourceandOutputCircuits.For 2-wire cir-
(B) Conductor Ampacity. PV system currents shall be
cuits connected to bipolar systems, the maximum system
considered to be continuous. Circuit conductors shall be
voltage shall be the highest voltage between the conduc-
sizedtocarrynotlessthanthelargerof690.8(B)(1)or(2).
tors of the 2-wire circuit if all of the following condi-
tions apply: (1) One hundred and twenty-five percent of the maximum
(1) One conductor of each circuit of a bipolar subarray is currents calculated in 690.8(A) before the application of
solidly grounded. adjustment and correction factors.
Exception: The operation of ground-fault or arc-fault de- Exception: Circuitscontaininganassembly,togetherwith
vices (abnormal operation) shall be permitted to interrupt its overcurrent device(s), that is listed for continuous op-
this connection to ground when the entire bipolar array erationat100percentofitsratingshallbepermittedtobe
becomes two distinct arrays isolated from each other and used at 100 percent of its rating.
the utilization equipment. (cid:127)
70–626 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 4 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.10
(2) The maximum currents calculated in 690.8(A) after the (C) Direct-Current Rating. Overcurrent devices, either
application of adjustment and correction factors. fuses or circuit breakers, used in any dc portion of a PV
(cid:127) power system shall be listed and shall have the appropriate
(C) SystemswithMultipleDirect-CurrentVoltages.For voltage, current, and interrupt ratings.
aPVpowersourcethathasmultipleoutputcircuitvoltages
(D) PhotovoltaicSourceandOutputCircuits.ListedPV
and employs a common-return conductor, the ampacity of
overcurrentdevicesshallberequiredtoprovideovercurrent
thecommon-returnconductorshallnotbelessthanthesum
protection in PV source and output circuits. The overcur-
of the ampere ratings of the overcurrent devices of the
rent devices shall be accessible but shall not be required to
individual output circuits.
be readily accessible.
(D) SizingofModuleInterconnectionConductors.Where
(E) Series Overcurrent Protection. In grounded PVsource
a single overcurrent device is used to protect a set of two or
circuits, a single overcurrent protection device, where re-
moreparallel-connectedmodulecircuits,theampacityofeach
quired, shall be permitted to protect the PV modules and the
of the module interconnection conductors shall not be less
interconnectingconductors.InungroundedPVsourcecircuits
thanthesumoftheratingofthesingleovercurrentdeviceplus
complying with 690.35, an overcurrent protection device,
125percentoftheshort-circuitcurrentfromtheotherparallel-
where required, shall be installed in each ungrounded circuit
connectedmodules. conductor and shall be permitted to protect the PV modules
andtheinterconnectingcables.
690.9 Overcurrent Protection.
(F) Power Transformers. Overcurrent protection for a
(A) Circuits and Equipment. PV source circuit, PV out- transformerwithasource(s)oneachsideshallbeprovided
put circuit, inverter output circuit, and storage battery cir- in accordance with 450.3 by considering first one side of
cuit conductors and equipment shall be protected in accor- the transformer, then the other side of the transformer, as
dance with the requirements of Article 240. Protection the primary.
devices for PV source circuits and PV output circuits shall
Exception: A power transformer with a current rating on
beinaccordancewiththerequirementsof690.9(B)through
the side connected toward the utility-interactive inverter
(E). Circuits, either ac or dc, connected to current-limited
output,notlessthantheratedcontinuousoutputcurrentof
supplies (e.g., PV modules, ac output of utility-interactive the inverter, shall be permitted without overcurrent protec-
inverters), and also connected to sources having signifi- tion from the inverter.
cantly higher current availability (e.g., parallel strings of
modules, utility power), shall be protected at the source 690.10 Stand-Alone Systems. The premises wiring sys-
from overcurrent. temshallbeadequatetomeettherequirementsofthisCode
forasimilarinstallationconnectedtoaservice.Thewiring
Exception: Anovercurrentdeviceshallnotberequiredfor
on the supply side of the building or structure disconnect-
PVmodulesorPVsourcecircuitconductorssizedinaccor-
ingmeansshallcomplywiththerequirementsofthisCode,
dance with 690.8(B) where one of the following applies:
except as modified by 690.10(A) through (E).
(a) There are no external sources such as parallel-
(A) Inverter Output. The ac output from a stand-alone
connected source circuits, batteries, or backfeed from invert-
inverter(s) shall be permitted to supply ac power to the
ers.
building or structure disconnecting means at current levels
(b) The short-circuit currents from all sources do not
less than the calculated load connected to that disconnect.
exceed the ampacity of the conductors and the maximum The inverter output rating or the rating of an alternate en-
overcurrent protective device size rating specified on the ergysourceshallbeequaltoorgreaterthantheloadposed
PV module nameplate. by the largest single utilization equipment connected to the
(cid:127) system. Calculated general lighting loads shall not be con-
(B) Overcurrent Device Ratings. Overcurrent device rat- sidered as a single load.
ings shall be not less than 125 percent of the maximum
currents calculated in 690.8(A). (B) Sizing and Protection. The circuit conductors be-
tween the inverter output and the building or structure dis-
Exception: Circuitscontaininganassembly,togetherwith
connecting means shall be sized based on the output rating
its overcurrent device(s), that is listed for continuous op- of the inverter. These conductors shall be protected from
erationat100percentofitsratingshallbepermittedtobe overcurrents in accordance with Article 240. The overcur-
used at 100 percent of its rating. rentprotectionshallbelocatedattheoutputoftheinverter.
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–627

--- PAGE 5 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.11 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
(C) Single 120-Volt Supply. The inverter output of a (2) Controlledconductorsshallbelimitedtonotmorethan
stand-alone solar PV system shall be permitted to supply 30 volts and 240 volt-amperes within 10 seconds of
120 volts to single-phase, 3-wire, 120/240-volt service rapid shutdown initiation.
equipment or distribution panels where there are no (3) Voltage and power shall be measured between any two
240-volt outlets and where there are no multiwire branch conductors and between any conductor and ground.
circuits. In all installations, the rating of the overcurrent
(4) The rapid shutdown initiation methods shall be labeled
device connected to the output of the inverter shall be less
in accordance with 690.56(C).
than the rating of the neutral bus in the service equipment.
(5) Equipment that performs the rapid shutdown shall be
This equipment shall be marked with the following words
listed and identified.
or equivalent:
WARNING
III. Disconnecting Means
SINGLE 120-VOLT SUPPLY. DO NOT CONNECT
MULTIWIRE BRANCH CIRCUITS! 690.13 Building orOtherStructure Supplied by a Pho-
The warning sign(s) or label(s) shall comply with tovoltaic System. Means shall be provided to disconnect
110.21(B). allungroundeddcconductorsofaPVsystemfromallother
conductors in a building or other structure.
(D) Energy Storage or Backup Power System Require-
(cid:127)
ments. Energy storage or backup power supplies are not
(A) Location. The PV disconnecting means shall be in-
required.
stalled at a readily accessible location either on the outside
of a building or structure or inside nearest the point of
(E) Back-Fed Circuit Breakers. Plug-in type back-fed
entrance of the system conductors.
circuit breakers connected to a stand-alone or multimode
inverter output in stand-alone systems shall be secured in Exception: Installations that comply with 690.31(G) shall
accordancewith408.36(D).Circuitbreakersmarked“line” be permitted to have the disconnecting means located re-
and “load” shall not be back-fed. mote from the point of entry of the system conductors.
690.11 Arc-Fault Circuit Protection (Direct Current). The PV system disconnecting means shall not be in-
Photovoltaicsystemswithdcsourcecircuits,dcoutputcir- stalled in bathrooms.
cuits, or both, operating at a PV system maximum system
(B) Marking. Each PV system disconnecting means shall
voltageof80voltsorgreater,shallbeprotectedbyalisted
be permanently marked to identify it as a PV system dis-
(dc) arc-fault circuit interrupter, PV type, or other system
connect.
componentslistedtoprovideequivalentprotection.ThePV
arc-fault protection means shall comply with the following
(C) Suitable for Use. Each PV system disconnecting
requirements:
meansshallnotberequiredtobesuitableasserviceequip-
(1) The system shall detect and interrupt arcing faults re-
ment.
sulting from a failure in the intended continuity of a
conductor,connection,module,orothersystemcompo- (D) Maximum Number of Disconnects. The PV system
nent in the dc PV source and dc PV output circuits. disconnecting means shall consist of not more than six
(cid:127)
(2) The system shall require that the disabled or discon- switches or six circuit breakers mounted in a single enclo-
nected equipment be manually restarted. sure or in a group of separate enclosures.
(3) The system shall have an annunciator that provides a
(E) Grouping. The PV system disconnecting means shall
visual indication that the circuit interrupter has oper-
be grouped with other disconnecting means for the system
ated. This indication shall not reset automatically.
in accordance with 690.13(D). A PV disconnecting means
690.12 Rapid Shutdown of PV Systems on Buildings. shall not be required at the PV module or array location.
PVsystemcircuitsinstalledonorinbuildingsshallinclude (cid:127)
a rapid shutdown function that controls specific conductors 690.15 Disconnection of Photovoltaic Equipment. Means
in accordance with 690.12(1) through (5) as follows. shall be provided to disconnect equipment, such as invert-
(1) Requirements for controlled conductors shall apply ers, batteries, and charge controllers, from all ungrounded
onlytoPVsystemconductorsofmorethan1.5m(5ft) conductors of all sources. If the equipment is energized
in length inside a building, or more than 3 m (10 ft) from more than one source, the disconnecting means shall
from a PV array. be grouped and identified.
70–628 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 6 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.17
A single disconnecting means in accordance with 690.17 690.17 Disconnect Type.
shall be permitted for the combined ac output of one or
more inverters or ac modules in an interactive system. (A) ManuallyOperable.Thedisconnectingmeansforun-
grounded PV conductors shall consist of a manually oper-
(A) Utility-Interactive Inverters Mounted in Not able switch(es) or circuit breaker(s). The disconnecting
ReadilyAccessible Locations. Utility-interactive inverters means shall be permitted to be power operable with provi-
shall be permitted to be mounted on roofs or other exterior sions for manual operation in the event of a power-supply
areas that are not readily accessible and shall comply with failure. The disconnecting means shall be one of the fol-
690.15(A)(1) through (4): lowing listed devices:
(1) Adc PVdisconnecting means shall be mounted within (1) APV industrial control switch marked for use in PV
sight of or in each inverter. systems
(2) An ac disconnecting means shall be mounted within (2) A PV molded-case circuit breaker marked for use in
sight of or in each inverter. PV systems
(3) The ac output conductors from the inverter and an ad- (3) APV molded-case switch marked for use in PV sys-
ditional ac disconnecting means for the inverter shall tems
comply with 690.13(A). (4) APV enclosed switch marked for use in PV systems
(4) Aplaque shall be installed in accordance with 705.10. (5) APVopen-typeswitchmarkedforuseinPVsystems
(6) A dc-rated molded-case circuit breaker suitable for
(B) Equipment. Equipment such as PVsource circuit iso-
backfeed operation
lating switches, overcurrent devices, dc-to-dc converters,
and blocking diodes shall be permitted on the PV side of (7) A dc-rated molded-case switch suitable for backfeed
the PV disconnecting means. operation
(8) Adc-rated enclosed switch
(C) Direct-Current Combiner Disconnects. The dc out-
(9) Adc-rated open-type switch
putofdccombinersmountedonroofsofdwellingsorother
(10) Adc-rated rated low-voltage power circuit breaker
buildings shall have a load break disconnecting means lo-
cated in the combiner or within 1.8 m (6 ft) of the com-
Informational Note: Devices marked with “line” and
biner. The disconnecting means shall be permitted to be
“load”arenotsuitableforbackfeedorreversecurrent.
remotely controlled but shall be manually operable locally
when control power is not available. (B) Simultaneous Opening of Poles. The PV disconnect-
ing means shall simultaneously disconnect all ungrounded
690.16 Fuses. supply conductors.
(A) Disconnecting Means. Disconnecting means shall be (C) ExternallyOperableandIndicating.ThePVdiscon-
provided to disconnect a fuse from all sources of supply if necting means shall be externally operable without expos-
the fuse is energized from both directions. Such a fuse in a ingtheoperatortocontactwithlivepartsandshallindicate
PV source circuit shall be capable of being disconnected whether in the open or closed position.
independently of fuses in other PV source circuits.
(D) Disconnection of Grounded Conductor. A switch,
(B) Fuse Servicing. Disconnecting means shall be in- circuit breaker, or other device shall not be installed in a
stalled on PV output circuits where overcurrent devices grounded conductor if operation of that switch, circuit
(fuses) must be serviced that cannot be isolated from ener- breaker, or other device leaves the marked, grounded con-
gized circuits. The disconnecting means shall be within ductor in an ungrounded and energized state.
sight of, and accessible to, the location of the fuse or inte-
ExceptionNo.1: Aswitchorcircuitbreakerthatispartof
gralwithfuseholderandshallcomplywith690.17.Where
a ground-fault detection system required by 690.5, or that
thedisconnectingmeansarelocatedmorethan1.8m(6ft)
is part of an arc-fault detection/interruption system re-
from the overcurrent device, a directory showing the loca-
quired by 690.11, shall be permitted to open the grounded
tion of each disconnect shall be installed at the overcurrent
conductor when that switch or circuit breaker is automati-
device location.
callyopenedasanormalfunctionofthedeviceinrespond-
Non-load-break-rated disconnecting means shall be
ing to ground faults.
marked “Do not open under load.”
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–629

--- PAGE 7 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.18 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
Exception No. 2: A disconnecting switch shall be permit- readily accessible locations, circuit conductors shall be
ted in a grounded conductor if all of the following condi- guarded or installed in a raceway.
tions are met:
Informational Note: Photovoltaic modules operate at el-
evated temperatures when exposed to high ambient tem-
(1) The switch is used only for PV array maintenance.
peratures and to bright sunlight. These temperatures rou-
(2) The switch is accessible only by qualified persons.
tinely exceed 70°C (158°F) in many locations. Module
(3) The switch is rated for the maximum dc voltage and interconnection conductors are available with insulation
current that could be present during any operation, rated for wet locations and a temperature rating of 90°C
(194°F)orgreater.
including ground-fault conditions.
(B) Identification and Grouping. PV source circuits and
(E) Interrupting Rating. The building or structure dis-
PV output circuits shall not be contained in the same race-
connecting means shall have an interrupting rating suffi-
way, cable tray, cable, outlet box, junction box, or similar
cient for the maximum circuit voltage and current that is
fitting as conductors, feeders, branch circuits of other
available at the line terminals of the equipment. Where all
non-PVsystems,orinverteroutputcircuits,unlessthecon-
terminals of the disconnecting means may be energized in
ductorsofthedifferentsystemsareseparatedbyapartition.
the open position, a warning sign shall be mounted on or
PV system conductors shall be identified and grouped as
adjacent to the disconnecting means. The sign shall be
required by 690.31(B)(1) through (4). The means of iden-
clearlylegibleandhavethefollowingwordsorequivalent:
tificationshallbepermittedbyseparatecolorcoding,mark-
WARNING ing tape, tagging, or other approved means.
ELECTRIC SHOCK HAZARD
(1) PV Source Circuits. PV source circuits shall be iden-
DO NOTTOUCH TERMINALS.
tified at all points of termination, connection, and splices.
TERMINALS ON BOTH THE LINE
ANDLOADSIDESMAYBEENERGIZEDINTHE (2) PV Output and Inverter Circuits. The conductors of
OPEN POSITION. PV output circuits and inverter input and output circuits
The warning sign(s) or label(s) shall comply with shall be identified at all points of termination, connection,
110.21(B). and splices.
Exception: A connector shall be permitted to be used as
(3) Conductors of Multiple Systems. Where the conduc-
an ac or a dc disconnecting means, provided that it com-
torsofmorethanonePVsystemoccupythesamejunction
plies with the requirements of 690.33 and is listed and
box,raceway,orequipment,theconductorsofeachsystem
identified for use with specific equipment.
shallbeidentifiedatalltermination,connection,andsplice
points.
690.18 Installation and Service of an Array. Open cir-
cuiting, short circuiting, or opaque covering shall be used Exception: Where the identification of the conductors is
to disable an array or portions of an array for installation evident by spacing or arrangement, further identification
and service. shall not be required.
Informational Note: Photovoltaic modules are energized (4) Grouping.WheretheconductorsofmorethanonePV
whileexposedtolight.Installation,replacement,orservic- system occupy the same junction box or raceway with a
ing of array components while a module(s) is energized
removable cover(s), the ac and dc conductors of each sys-
mayexposepersonstoelectricshock.
tem shall be grouped separately by cable ties or similar
means at least once and shall then be grouped at intervals
IV. Wiring Methods not to exceed 1.8 m (6 ft).
690.31 Methods Permitted. Exception: Therequirementforgroupingshallnotapplyif
the circuit enters from a cable or raceway unique to the
(A) Wiring Systems. All raceway and cable wiring meth- circuit that makes the grouping obvious.
odsincludedinthisCode,otherwiringsystemsandfittings
specifically listed for use on PV arrays, and wiring as part (C) Single-Conductor Cable.
ofalistedsystemshallbepermitted.Wherewiringdevices (1) General. Single-conductor cable Type USE-2, and
with integral enclosures are used, sufficient length of cable single-conductor cable listed and labeled as photovol-
shall be provided to facilitate replacement. taic (PV) wire shall be permitted in exposed outdoor
WherePVsourceandoutputcircuitsoperatingatmaxi- locationsinPVsourcecircuitsforPVmoduleintercon-
mum system voltages greater than 30 volts are installed in nections within the PV array.
70–630 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 8 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.31
Exception: Raceways shall be used when required by (G) Direct-Current Photovoltaic Source and Direct-
690.31(A). CurrentOutputCircuitsonorInsideaBuilding.Where
dc PV source or dc PV output circuits from building-
(2) Cable Tray. PV source circuits and PV output circuits
integrated systems or other PV systems are run inside a
using single-conductor cable listed and labeled as pho-
buildingorstructure,theyshallbecontainedinmetalrace-
tovoltaic(PV)wireofallsizes,withorwithoutacable
ways, Type MC metal-clad cable that complies with
tray marking/rating, shall be permitted in cable trays
250.118(10),ormetalenclosuresfromthepointofpenetra-
installed in outdoor locations, provided that the cables
tion of the surface of the building or structure to the first
are supported at intervals not to exceed 300 mm
readily accessible disconnecting means. The disconnecting
(12 in.) and secured at intervals not to exceed 1.4 m
meansshallcomplywith690.13(B)and(C)and690.15(A)
(4.5 ft).
and (B). The wiring methods shall comply with the addi-
InformationalNote: PhotovoltaicwireandPVcablehave tionalinstallationrequirementsin690.31(G)(1)through(4).
anonstandardouterdiameter.SeeTable1ofChapter9for
conduitfillcalculations. (1) Embedded in Building Surfaces. Where circuits are
embedded in built-up, laminate, or membrane roofing ma-
(D) Multiconductor Cable. Multiconductor cable Type terials in roof areas not covered by PV modules and asso-
TC-ER or Type USE-2 shall be permitted in outdoor loca- ciated equipment, the location of circuits shall be clearly
tionsinPVinverteroutputcircuitswhereusedwithutility- marked using a marking protocol that is approved as being
interactive inverters mounted in locations that are not suitable for continuous exposure to sunlight and weather.
readily accessible. The cable shall be secured at intervals (cid:127)
(2) Flexible Wiring Methods. Where flexible metal con-
not exceeding 1.8 m (6 ft). Equipment grounding for the
duit (FMC) smaller than metric designator 21 (trade size
utilization equipment shall be provided by an equipment
grounding conductor within the cable.
3⁄
4
) orType MC cable smaller than 25 mm (1 in.) in diam-
eter containing PV power circuit conductors is installed
(E) FlexibleCordsandCables.Flexiblecordsandcables, acrossceilingsorfloorjoists,theracewayorcableshallbe
where used to connect the moving parts of tracking PV protectedbysubstantialguardstripsthatareatleastashigh
modules, shall comply with Article 400 and shall be of a as the raceway or cable. Where run exposed, other than
type identified as a hard service cord or portable power within 1.8 m (6 ft) of their connection to equipment, these
cable; they shall be suitable for extra-hard usage, listed for wiringmethodsshallcloselyfollowthebuildingsurfaceor
outdooruse,waterresistant,andsunlightresistant.Allowable be protected from physical damage by an approved means.
ampacities shall be in accordance with 400.5. For ambient
(3) Marking and Labeling Required. The following wir-
temperatures exceeding 30°C (86°F), the ampacities shall be
ing methods and enclosures that contain PV power source
deratedbytheappropriatefactorsgiveninTable690.31(E).
conductors shall be marked with the wording WARNING:
PHOTOVOLTAIC POWER SOURCE by means of perma-
(F) Small-Conductor Cables. Single-conductor cables
nentlyaffixedlabelsorotherapprovedpermanentmarking:
listed for outdoor use that are sunlight resistant and moisture
(1) Exposedraceways,cabletrays,andotherwiringmethods
resistantinsizes16AWGand18AWGshallbepermittedfor
moduleinterconnectionswheresuchcablesmeettheampacity (2) Covers or enclosures of pull boxes and junction boxes
requirements of 400.5. Section 310.15 shall be used to deter- (3) Conduit bodies in which any of the available conduit
minethecableampacityadjustmentandcorrectionfactors. openings are unused
Table690.31(E) CorrectionFactors
Ambient TemperatureRatingofConductor Ambient
Temperature Temperature
(°C) 60°C(140°F) 75°C(167°F) 90°C(194°F) 105°C(221°F) (°F)
30 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 86
31–35 0.91 0.94 0.96 0.97 87–95
36–40 0.82 0.88 0.91 0.93 96–104
41–45 0.71 0.82 0.87 0.89 105–113
46–50 0.58 0.75 0.82 0.86 114–122
51–55 0.41 0.67 0.76 0.82 123–131
56–60 — 0.58 0.71 0.77 132–140
61–70 — 0.33 0.58 0.68 141–158
71–80 — — 0.41 0.58 159–176
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–631

--- PAGE 9 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.32 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
(4) Marking and Labeling Methods and Locations. The (A) Configuration. The connectors shall be polarized and
labels or markings shall be visible after installation. The shall have a configuration that is noninterchangeable with
labels shall be reflective, and all letters shall be capitalized receptacles in other electrical systems on the premises.
and shall be a minimum height of 9.5 mm (3⁄
8
in.) in white
(B) Guarding. The connectors shall be constructed and
on a red background. PV power circuit labels shall appear
installedsoastoguardagainstinadvertentcontactwithlive
on every section of the wiring system that is separated by
parts by persons.
enclosures,walls,partitions,ceilings,orfloors.Spacingbe-
tween labels or markings, or between a label and a mark-
(C) Type. The connectors shall be of the latching or lock-
ing, shall not be more than 3 m (10 ft). Labels required by
ingtype.Connectorsthatarereadilyaccessibleandthatare
this section shall be suitable for the environment where
used in circuits operating at over 30 volts, nominal, maxi-
they are installed.
mum system voltage for dc circuits, or 30 volts for ac
circuits, shall require a tool for opening.
(H) Flexible, Fine-Stranded Cables. Flexible, fine-
stranded cables shall be terminated only with terminals, (D) Grounding Member. The grounding member shall be
lugs, devices, or connectors in accordance with 110.14. the first to make and the last to break contact with the
mating connector.
(I) Bipolar Photovoltaic Systems. Where the sum, with-
out consideration of polarity, of the PV system voltages of (E) InterruptionofCircuit.Connectorsshallbeeither(1)
the two monopole subarrays exceeds the rating of the con- or (2):
ductorsandconnectedequipment,monopolesubarraysina (1) Be rated for interrupting current without hazard to the
bipolar PV system shall be physically separated, and the operator.
electrical output circuits from each monopole subarray
(2) Be a type that requires the use of a tool to open and
shall be installed in separate raceways until connected to
marked “Do Not Disconnect Under Load” or “Not for
the inverter.The disconnecting means and overcurrent pro-
Current Interrupting.”
tective devices for each monopole subarray output shall be
in separate enclosures. All conductors from each separate 690.34 Access to Boxes. Junction, pull, and outlet boxes
monopole subarray shall be routed in the same raceway. located behind modules or panels shall be so installed that
Bipolar PV systems shall be clearly marked with a perma- the wiring contained in them can be rendered accessible
nent, legible warning notice indicating that the disconnec- directly or by displacement of a module(s) or panel(s) se-
tionofthegroundedconductor(s)mayresultinovervoltage cured by removable fasteners and connected by a flexible
on the equipment. wiring system.
Exception: Listed switchgear rated for the maximum volt-
690.35 Ungrounded Photovoltaic Power Systems. Pho-
age between circuits and containing a physical barrier
tovoltaic power systems shall be permitted to operate with
separating the disconnecting means for each monopole
ungrounded PV source and output circuits where the sys-
subarray shall be permitted to be used instead of discon-
tem complies with 690.35(A) through (G).
necting means in separate enclosures.
(A) Disconnects.AllPVsourceandoutputcircuitconduc-
(J) ModuleConnectionArrangement.Theconnectionto tors shall have disconnects complying with 690, Part III.
a module or panel shall be arranged so that removal of a
moduleorpanelfromaPVsourcecircuitdoesnotinterrupt (B) Overcurrent Protection. All PV source and output
a grounded conductor connection to other PV source cir- circuit conductors shall have overcurrent protection com-
cuits. plying with 690.9.
(C) Ground-Fault Protection. All PV source and output
690.32 Component Interconnections. Fittings and con-
circuits shall be provided with a ground-fault protection
nectors that are intended to be concealed at the time of
device or system that complies with 690.35(1) through (4):
on-siteassembly,wherelistedforsuchuse,shallbepermit-
(1) Detects ground fault(s) in the PV array dc current-
ted for on-site interconnection of modules or other array
carrying conductors and components
components. Such fittings and connectors shall be equal to
thewiringmethodemployedininsulation,temperaturerise, (2) Indicates that a ground fault has occurred
and fault-current withstand, and shall be capable of resist- (3) Automatically disconnects all conductors or causes the
ing the effects of the environment in which they are used. inverter or charge controller connected to the faulted
circuit to automatically cease supplying power to out-
690.33 Connectors. The connectors permitted by Article put circuits
690 shall comply with 690.33(A) through (E). (4) Is listed for providing PV ground-fault protection
70–632 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 10 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.45
(D) Conductors. The PV source conductors shall consist conductor-to-ground bond made by the ground-fault pro-
of the following: tection device. This bond, where internal to the ground-
(1) Metallic or nonmetallic jacketed multiconductor cables fault equipment, shall not be duplicated with an external
connection.
(2) Conductors installed in raceways
(3) ConductorslistedandidentifiedasPVwireinstalledas
690.43 EquipmentGrounding.Equipmentgroundingcon-
exposed, single conductors, or
ductorsanddevicesshallcomplywith690.43(A)through(F).
(4) Conductors that are direct-buried and identified for
direct-burial use (A) Equipment Grounding Required. Exposed non–
current-carrying metal parts of PV module frames, elec-
(E) BatterySystems.ThePVpowersystemdirect-current
trical equipment, and conductor enclosures shall be
circuits shall be permitted to be used with ungrounded bat-
grounded in accordance with 250.134 or 250.136(A), re-
tery systems complying with 690.71(G).
gardless of voltage.
(F) Marking. The PV power source shall be labeled with
(B) Equipment Grounding Conductor Required. An
the following warning at each junction box, combiner box,
equipment grounding conductor between a PV array and
disconnect, and device where energized, ungrounded cir-
other equipment shall be required in accordance with
cuits may be exposed during service:
250.110.
WARNING
(C) StructureasEquipmentGroundingConductor.De-
ELECTRIC SHOCK HAZARD. THE DC CON-
viceslistedandidentifiedforgroundingthemetallicframes
DUCTORS OF THIS PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM
of PV modules or other equipment shall be permitted to
ARE UNGROUNDED AND MAY BE ENER-
bond the exposed metal surfaces or other equipment to
GIZED.
mounting structures. Metallic mounting structures, other
The warning sign(s) or label(s) shall comply with
than building steel, used for grounding purposes shall be
110.21(B).
identifiedasequipment-groundingconductorsorshallhave
(G) Equipment. The inverters or charge controllers used identified bonding jumpers or devices connected between
in systems with ungrounded PV source and output circuits the separate metallic sections and shall be bonded to the
shall be listed for the purpose. grounding system.
(D) Photovoltaic Mounting Systems and Devices. De-
V. Grounding
vices and systems used for mounting PV modules that are
also used to provide grounding of the module frames shall
690.41 System Grounding. Photovoltaic systems shall
be identified for the purpose of grounding PV modules.
comply with one of the following:
(1) Ungrounded systems shall comply with 690.35.
(E) Adjacent Modules. Devices identified and listed for
(2) Grounded two-wire systems shall have one conductor bonding the metallic frames of PV modules shall be per-
grounded or be impedance grounded, and the system mitted to bond the exposed metallic frames of PVmodules
shall comply with 690.5. to the metallic frames of adjacent PV modules.
(3) Grounded bipolar systems shall have the reference
(F) All Conductors Together. Equipment grounding con-
(center tap) conductor grounded or be impedance
ductors for the PV array and structure (where installed)
grounded, and the system shall comply with 690.5.
shall be contained within the same raceway or cable or
(4) Other methods that accomplish equivalent system pro-
otherwise run with the PV array circuit conductors when
tection in accordance with 250.4(A) with equipment
those circuit conductors leave the vicinity of the PV array.
listedandidentifiedfortheuseshallbepermittedtobe
used.
690.45 Size of Equipment Grounding Conductors.
(cid:127)
Equipment grounding conductors for PV source and PV
690.42 Point of System Grounding Connection. The dc
output circuits shall be sized in accordance with 250.122.
circuit grounding connection shall be made at any single
Where no overcurrent protective device is used in the cir-
point on the PV output circuit.
cuit, an assumed overcurrent device rated at the PV maxi-
Informational Note: Locating the grounding connection mum circuit current shall be used when applying Table
pointascloseaspracticabletothePVsourcebetterprotects
250.122. Increases in equipment grounding conductor size
thesystemfromvoltagesurgesduetolightning.
to address voltage drop considerations shall not be re-
Exception: Systems with a 690.5 ground-fault protection quired. An equipment grounding conductor shall not be
device shall be permitted to have the required grounded smaller than 14AWG.
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–633

--- PAGE 11 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.46 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
(cid:127)
690.46 Array Equipment Grounding Conductors. For Informational Note No. 2: For utility-interactive systems,
PVmodules,equipmentgroundingconductorssmallerthan the existing premises grounding system serves as the ac
groundingsystem.
6AWG shall comply with 250.120(C).
Whereinstalledinraceways,equipmentgroundingcon- (1) Separate Direct-Current Grounding Electrode Sys-
ductors and grounding electrode conductors not larger than tem Bonded to the Alternating-Current Grounding
6AWG shall be permitted to be solid. Electrode System. A separate dc grounding electrode or
system shall be installed, and it shall be bonded directly to
690.47 Grounding Electrode System. theacgroundingelectrodesystem.Thesizeofanybonding
jumper(s) between the ac and dc systems shall be based on
(A) Alternating-Current Systems. If installing an ac sys-
the larger size of the existing ac grounding electrode con-
tem, a grounding electrode system shall be provided in
ductor or the size of the dc grounding electrode conductor
accordance with 250.50 through 250.60. The grounding
specified by 250.166. The dc grounding electrode system
electrode conductor shall be installed in accordance with
conductor(s) or the bonding jumpers to the ac grounding
250.64.
electrode system shall not be used as a substitute for any
required ac equipment grounding conductors.
(B) Direct-Current Systems. If installing a dc system, a
groundingelectrodesystemshallbeprovidedinaccordance (2) Common Direct-Current and Alternating-Current
with 250.166 for grounded systems or 250.169 for un- GroundingElectrode.Adcgroundingelectrodeconductor
groundedsystems.Thegroundingelectrodeconductorshall of the size specified by 250.166 shall be run from the
be installed in accordance with 250.64. marked dc grounding electrode connection point to the ac
A common dc grounding-electrode conductor shall be grounding electrode. Where an ac grounding electrode is
permitted to serve multiple inverters. The size of the com- not accessible, the dc grounding electrode conductor shall
mongroundingelectrodeandthetapconductorsshallbein be connected to the ac grounding electrode conductor in
accordance with 250.166.The tap conductors shall be con- accordance with 250.64(C)(1) or 250.64(C)(2) or by using
nected to the common grounding-electrode conductor by a connector listed for grounding and bonding. This dc
exothermic welding or with connectors listed as grounding grounding electrode conductor shall not be used as a sub-
and bonding equipment in such a manner that the common stituteforanyrequiredacequipmentgroundingconductors.
grounding electrode conductor remains without a splice or
joint. (3) Combined Direct-Current Grounding Electrode
An ac equipment grounding system shall be permitted Conductor and Alternating-Current Equipment
to be used for equipment grounding of inverters and other Grounding Conductor. An unspliced, or irreversibly
equipment and for the ground-fault detection reference for spliced, combined grounding conductor shall be run from
ungrounded PV systems. the marked dc grounding electrode conductor connection
point along with the ac circuit conductors to the grounding
(C) Systems with Alternating-Current and Direct- busbar in the associated ac equipment. This combined
Current Grounding Requirements. Photovoltaic systems grounding conductor shall be the larger of the sizes speci-
havingdccircuitsandaccircuitswithnodirectconnection fied by 250.122 or 250.166 and shall be installed in accor-
between the dc grounded conductor and ac grounded con- dance with 250.64(E). For ungrounded systems, this con-
ductorshallhaveadcgroundingsystem.Thedcgrounding ductor shall be sized in accordance with 250.122 and shall
system shall be bonded to the ac grounding system by one not be required to be larger than the largest ungrounded
of the methods in (1), (2), or (3). phase conductor.
This section shall not apply to ac PV modules.
When using the methods of (C)(2) or (C)(3), the exist- (D) AdditionalAuxiliary Electrodes forArray Ground-
ingacgroundingelectrodesystemshallmeettheapplicable ing. Agrounding electrode shall be installed in accordance
requirements ofArticle 250, Part III. with 250.52 and 250.54 at the location of all ground- and
pole-mounted PV arrays and as close as practicable to the
Informational Note No. 1: ANSI/UL 1741, Standard for
locationofroof-mountedPVarrays.Theelectrodesshallbe
Inverters,Converters,andControllersforUseinIndepen-
connecteddirectlytothearrayframe(s)orstructure.Thedc
dent Power Systems, requires that any inverter or charge
controllerthathasabondingjumperbetweenthegrounded grounding electrode conductor shall be sized according to
dc conductor and the grounding system connection point 250.166.Additionalelectrodesarenotpermittedtobeused
havethatpointmarkedasagroundingelectrodeconductor asasubstituteforequipmentbondingorequipmentground-
(GEC) connection point. In PVinverters, the terminals for
ing conductor requirements. The structure of a ground- or
the dc equipment grounding conductors and the terminals
pole-mounted PVarray shall be permitted to be considered
for ac equipment grounding conductors are generally con-
nectedto,orelectricallyincommonwith,agroundingbus- a grounding electrode if it meets the requirements of
barthathasamarkeddcGECterminal. 250.52. Roof-mounted PV arrays shall be permitted to use
70–634 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 12 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.56
the metal frame of a building or structure if the require- 690.53 Direct-Current Photovoltaic Power Source. A
ments of 250.52(A)(2) are met. permanent label for the direct-current PV power source in-
dicating the information specified in (1) through (5) shall
Exception No. 1: An array grounding electrode(s) shall
beprovidedbytheinstalleratthePVdisconnectingmeans:
not be required where the load served by the array is inte-
(1) Rated maximum power-point current.
gral with the array.
(2) Rated maximum power-point voltage.
Exception No. 2: An additional array grounding elec-
trode(s) shall not be required if located within 1.8 m (6 ft) (3) Maximum system voltage.
of the premises wiring electrode.
Informational Note to (3): See 690.7(A) for maximum PV
systemvoltage.
690.48 Continuity of Equipment Grounding Systems.
(4) Maximum circuit current. Where the PV power source
Where the removal of equipment disconnects the bonding
has multiple outputs, 690.53(1) and (4) shall be speci-
connection between the grounding electrode conductor and
fied for each output.
exposed conducting surfaces in the PV source or output
circuit equipment, a bonding jumper shall be installed Informational Note to (4): See 690.8(A) for calculation of
maximumcircuitcurrent.
while the equipment is removed.
(5) Maximum rated output current of the charge controller
690.49 Continuity of Photovoltaic Source and Output (if installed).
Circuit Grounded Conductors. Where the removal of the
InformationalNote: Reflectingsystemsusedforirradiance
utility-interactive inverter or other equipment disconnects
enhancement may result in increased levels of output cur-
the bonding connection between the grounding electrode
rentandpower.
conductor and the PV source and/or PV output circuit
grounded conductor, a bonding jumper shall be installed to
690.54 Interactive System Point of Interconnection. All
maintain the system grounding while the inverter or other
interactive system(s) points of interconnection with other
equipment is removed.
sources shall be marked at an accessible location at the
disconnecting means as a power source and with the rated
690.50 Equipment Bonding Jumpers. Equipment bond-
ac output current and the nominal operating ac voltage.
ing jumpers, if used, shall comply with 250.120(C).
690.55 Photovoltaic Power Systems Employing Energy
VI. Marking
Storage. Photovoltaic power systems employing energy
690.51 Modules.Modulesshallbemarkedwithidentifica- storage shall also be marked with the maximum operating
tionofterminalsorleadsastopolarity,maximumovercur- voltage,includinganyequalizationvoltageandthepolarity
rent device rating for module protection, and with the fol- of the grounded circuit conductor.
lowing ratings:
(1) Open-circuit voltage 690.56 Identification of Power Sources.
(2) Operating voltage
(A) Facilities with Stand-Alone Systems. Any structure
(3) Maximum permissible system voltage
orbuildingwithaPVpowersystemthatisnotconnectedto
(4) Operating current
a utility service source and is a stand-alone system shall
(5) Short-circuit current
have a permanent plaque or directory installed on the exte-
(6) Maximum power
rior of the building or structure at a readily visible location
acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. The plaque
690.52 Alternating-Current Photovoltaic Modules.
or directory shall indicate the location of system discon-
Alternating-current modules shall be marked with identifi-
necting means and that the structure contains a stand-alone
cation of terminals or leads and with identification of the
electrical power system. The marking shall be in accor-
following ratings:
dance with 690.31(G).
(1) Nominal operating ac voltage
(2) Nominal operating ac frequency (B) Facilities with Utility Services and PV Systems.
(3) Maximum ac power Buildings or structures with both utility service and a PV
(4) Maximum ac current system shall have a permanent plaque or directory provid-
(5) Maximumovercurrentdeviceratingforacmodulepro- ingthelocationoftheservicedisconnectingmeansandthe
tection PV system disconnecting means if not located at the same
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–635

--- PAGE 13 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.57 ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS
location. The warning sign(s) or label(s) shall comply with Exception: Wherelivepartsarenotaccessibleduringrou-
110.21(B). tine battery maintenance, a battery system voltage in ac-
cordance with 690.7 shall be permitted.
(C) Facilities with Rapid Shutdown. Buildings or struc-
tures with both utility service and a PVsystem, complying (2) GuardingofLiveParts.Livepartsofbatterysystems
with 690.12, shall have a permanent plaque or directory fordwellingsshallbeguardedtopreventaccidentalcontact
including the following wording: bypersonsorobjects,regardlessofvoltageorbatterytype.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM EQUIPPED WITH
Informational Note: Batteries in solar photovoltaic sys-
RAPID SHUTDOWN
tems are subject to extensive charge–discharge cycles and
The plaque or directory shall be reflective, with all let-
typically require frequent maintenance, such as checking
ters capitalized and having a minimum height of 9.5 mm electrolyteandcleaningconnections.
(3⁄
8
in.), in white on red background.
(C) Current Limiting. Alisted, current-limiting, overcur-
rent device shall be installed in each circuit adjacent to the
VII. Connection to Other Sources
batteries where the available short-circuit current from a
690.57 Load Disconnect. Aload disconnect that has mul- battery or battery bank exceeds the interrupting or with-
tiple sources of power shall disconnect all sources when in stand ratings of other equipment in that circuit. The instal-
the off position. lation of current-limiting fuses shall comply with 690.16.
(D) BatteryNonconductiveCasesandConductiveRacks.
690.60 Identified Interactive Equipment. Only inverters
Flooded,vented,lead-acidbatterieswithmorethantwenty-
and ac modules listed and identified as interactive shall be
four 2-volt cells connected in series (48 volts, nominal)
permitted in interactive systems.
shall not use conductive cases or shall not be installed in
conductive cases. Conductive racks used to support the
690.61 Loss of Interactive System Power. An inverter or
nonconductive cases shall be permitted where no rack ma-
anacmoduleinaninteractivesolarPVsystemshallautomati-
terial is located within 150 mm (6 in.) of the tops of the
callyde-energizeitsoutputtotheconnectedelectricalproduc-
nonconductive cases.
tionanddistributionnetworkuponlossofvoltageinthatsys-
This requirement shall not apply to any type of valve-
tem and shall remain in that state until the electrical
regulated lead-acid (VRLA) battery or any other types of
productionanddistributionnetworkvoltagehasbeenrestored.
sealed batteries that may require steel cases for proper op-
AnormallyinteractivesolarPVsystemshallbepermit-
eration.
ted to operate as a stand-alone system to supply loads that
have been disconnected from electrical production and dis-
(E) DisconnectionofSeriesBatteryCircuits.Batterycir-
tribution network sources.
cuits subject to field servicing, where more than twenty-
four2-voltcellsareconnectedinseries(48volts,nominal),
690.63 Unbalanced Interconnections. Unbalanced con-
shall have provisions to disconnect the series-connected
nections shall be in accordance with 705.100.
stringsintosegmentsof24cellsorlessformaintenanceby
qualifiedpersons.Non–load-breakboltedorplug-indiscon-
690.64 Point of Connection. Point of connection shall be
nects shall be permitted.
in accordance with 705.12.
(F) Battery Maintenance Disconnecting Means. Battery
VIII. Storage Batteries installations, where there are more than twenty-four 2-volt
cells connected in series (48 volts, nominal), shall have a
690.71 Installation. disconnecting means, accessible only to qualified persons,
that disconnects the grounded circuit conductor(s) in the
(A) General. Storage batteries in a solar photovoltaic sys-
battery electrical system for maintenance. This disconnect-
tem shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of
ing means shall not disconnect the grounded circuit con-
Article 480. The interconnected battery cells shall be con-
ductor(s) for the remainder of the photovoltaic electrical
sidered grounded where the photovoltaic power source is
system. A non–load-break-rated switch shall be permitted
installed in accordance with 690.41.
to be used as the disconnecting means.
(B) Dwellings.
(G) Battery Systems of More Than 48 Volts. On photo-
(1) Operating Voltage. Storage batteries for dwellings voltaic systems where the battery system consists of more
shall have the cells connected so as to operate at a voltage thantwenty-four2-voltcellsconnectedinseries(morethan
of 50 volts, nominal, or less. 48 volts, nominal), the battery system shall be permitted to
70–636 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 14 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
ARTICLE690—SOLARPHOTOVOLTAIC(PV)SYSTEMS 690.74
operate with ungrounded conductors, provided the follow- (1) Sole Means of Regulating Charging. A photovoltaic
ing conditions are met: power system employing a diversion charge controller as
(1) The photovoltaic array source and output circuits shall the sole means of regulating the charging of a battery shall
comply with 690.41. be equipped with a second independent means to prevent
(2) The dc and ac load circuits shall be solidly grounded. overcharging of the battery.
(3) All main ungrounded battery input/output circuit con-
(2) Circuits with Direct-Current Diversion Charge
ductors shall be provided with switched disconnects
Controller and Diversion Load. Circuits containing a dc
and overcurrent protection.
diversion charge controller and a dc diversion load shall
(4) Aground-fault detector and indicator shall be installed
comply with the following:
to monitor for ground faults in the battery bank.
(1) Thecurrentratingofthediversionloadshallbelessthan
orequaltothecurrentratingofthediversionloadcharge
(H) DisconnectsandOvercurrentProtection.Whereen-
controller. The voltage rating of the diversion load shall
ergy storage device input and output terminals are more
begreaterthanthemaximumbatteryvoltage.Thepower
than 1.5 m (5 ft) from connected equipment, or where the
ratingofthediversionloadshallbeatleast150percentof
circuits from these terminals pass through a wall or parti-
tion, the installation shall comply with the following: thepowerratingofthephotovoltaicarray.
(1) Adisconnectingmeansandovercurrentprotectionshall (2) The conductor ampacity and the rating of the overcur-
be provided at the energy storage device end of the rent device for this circuit shall be at least 150 percent
circuit. Fused disconnecting means or circuit breakers of the maximum current rating of the diversion charge
shall be permitted to be used. controller.
(2) Where fused disconnecting means are used, the line
(3) PVSystemsUsingUtility-InteractiveInverters.Pho-
terminals of the disconnecting means shall be con-
tovoltaic power systems using utility-interactive inverters
nected toward the energy storage device terminals.
tocontrolbatterystate-of-chargebydivertingexcesspower
(3) Overcurrent devices or disconnecting means shall not
into the utility system shall comply with (1) and (2):
be installed in energy storage device enclosures where
(1) These systems shall not be required to comply with
explosive atmospheres can exist.
690.72(B)(2). The charge regulation circuits used shall
(4) Aseconddisconnectingmeanslocatedattheconnected
comply with the requirements of 690.8.
equipment shall be installed where the disconnecting
(2) Thesesystemsshallhaveasecond,independentmeans
means required by 690.71(H)(1) is not within sight of
of controlling the battery charging process for use
the connected equipment.
when the utility is not present or when the primary
(5) Where the energy storage device disconnecting means
charge controller fails or is disabled.
is not within sight of the PV system ac and dc discon-
nectingmeans,placardsordirectoriesshallbeinstalled
(C) Buck/Boost Direct-Current Converters. When buck/
at the locations of all disconnecting means indicating
boost charge controllers and other dc power converters that
the location of all disconnecting means.
increaseordecreasetheoutputcurrentoroutputvoltagewith
respect to the input current or input voltage are installed, the
690.72 Charge Control.
requirementsshallcomplywith690.72(C)(1)and(C)(2).
(A) General. Equipment shall be provided to control the (1) The ampacity of the conductors in output circuits shall
chargingprocessofthebattery.Chargecontrolshallnotbe bebasedonthemaximumratedcontinuousoutputcur-
requiredwherethedesignofthephotovoltaicsourcecircuit rent of the charge controller or converter for the se-
ismatchedtothevoltageratingandchargecurrentrequire- lected output voltage range.
mentsoftheinterconnectedbatterycellsandthemaximum
(2) The voltage rating of the output circuits shall be based
chargingcurrentmultipliedby1hourislessthan3percent
on the maximum voltage output of the charge control-
of the rated battery capacity expressed in ampere-hours or
ler or converter for the selected output voltage range.
as recommended by the battery manufacturer.
All adjusting means for control of the charging process
690.74 Battery Interconnections.
shall be accessible only to qualified persons.
(A) Flexible Cables. Flexible cables, as identified in Ar-
Informational Note: Certain battery types such as valve-
ticle 400, in sizes 2/0 AWG and larger shall be permitted
regulatedleadacidornickelcadmiumcanexperiencether-
within the battery enclosure from battery terminals to a
malfailurewhenovercharged.
nearby junction box where they shall be connected to an
(B) Diversion Charge Controller. approved wiring method. Flexible battery cables shall also
2014Edition NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 70–637

--- PAGE 15 ---

Reproduced solely for use in a bid package to procure Grid Tied Solar Photovoltaic Systems.
690.80 ARTICLE692—FUELCELLSYSTEMS
be permitted between batteries and cells within the battery storagesuchasbatteries.Thesesystemsmayhaveacordc
enclosure. Such cables shall be listed for hard-service use output for utilization.
and identified as moisture resistant.
Flexible, fine-stranded cables shall be terminated only 692.2 Definitions.
with terminals, lugs, devices, or connectors in accordance
FuelCell.Anelectrochemicalsystemthatconsumesfuelto
with 110.14.
produce an electric current. In such cells, the main chemi-
cal reaction used for producing electric power is not com-
IX. Systems over 1000 Volts bustion. However, there may be sources of combustion
used within the overall cell system, such as reformers/fuel
690.80 General. Solar PV systems with a maximum sys- processors.
tem voltage over 1000 volts dc shall comply with Article
490andotherrequirementsapplicabletoinstallationsrated Fuel Cell System. The complete aggregate of equipment
over 1000 volts. used to convert chemical fuel into usable electricity and
typically consisting of a reformer, stack, power inverter,
690.81 Listing. Products listed for PV systems shall be and auxiliary equipment.
permitted to be used and installed in accordance with their
Interactive System. A fuel cell system that operates in
listing. PV wire that is listed for direct burial at voltages
parallelwithandmaydeliverpowertoanelectricalproduc-
above 600 volts, but not exceeding 2000 volts, shall be
tion and distribution network. For the purpose of this defi-
installed in accordance with Table 300.50, column 1.
nition, an energy storage subsystem of a fuel cell system,
such as a battery, is not another electrical production
690.85 Definitions. For the purposes of Part VIII of this
source.
article,thevoltagesusedtodeterminecableandequipment
ratings are as follows. Maximum System Voltage. The highest fuel cell inverter
outputvoltagebetweenanyungroundedconductorspresent
Battery Circuits. In battery circuits, the highest voltage
at accessible output terminals.
experienced under charging or equalizing conditions.
Output Circuit. The conductors used to connect the fuel
Photovoltaic Circuits. In dc PV source circuits and PV cell system to its electrical point of delivery.
output circuits, the maximum system voltage.
InformationalNote: Inthecaseofsitesthathaveseries-or
parallel-connected multiple units, the term output circuit
X. Electric Vehicle Charging also refers to the conductors used to electrically intercon-
nectthefuelcellsystem(s).
690.90 General. Photovoltaic systems used directly to
PointofCommonCoupling.Thepointatwhichthepower
charge electric vehicles shall comply with Article 625 in
productionanddistributionnetworkandthecustomerinter-
addition to the requirements of this article.
face occurs in an interactive system. Typically, this is the
load side of the power network meter.
690.91 Charging Equipment. Electric vehicle couplers
shall comply with 625.10. Personnel protection systems in Stand-Alone System. A fuel cell system that supplies
accordance with 625.22 and automatic de-energization of power independently of an electrical production and distri-
cables in accordance with 625.19 are not required for PV bution network.
systems with maximum system voltages of less than
80 volts dc. 692.3 OtherArticles. Wherever the requirements of other
articlesofthisCodeandArticle692differ,therequirements
ofArticle 692 shall apply, and, if the system is operated in
parallel with a primary source(s) of electricity, the require-
ments in 705.14, 705.16, 705.32, and 705.143 shall apply.
ARTICLE 692
Fuel Cell Systems 692.4 Installation.
(A) Fuel Cell System. Afuel cell system shall be permit-
I. General tedtosupplyabuildingorotherstructureinadditiontoany
service(s) of another electricity supply system(s).
692.1 Scope. This article identifies the requirements for
the installation of fuel cell power systems, which may be (B) Identification. A permanent plaque or directory, de-
stand-aloneorinteractivewithotherelectricpowerproduc- noting all electric power sources on or in the premises,
tion sources and may be with or without electric energy shall be installed at each service equipment location.
70–638 NATIONALELECTRICALCODE 2014Edition

--- PAGE 16 ---