PV Installation Professional
Job Task Analysis
December 2017
V. 12.14.17 www.nabcep.org
Raising Standards. Promoting Confidence.

--- PAGE 1 ---

Introduction
This document presents a comprehensive Job Task
Job Description
Analysis (JTA) for individuals who perform responsible
NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional
decision-making roles concerning the design, installation,
Given a potential site for a solar photovoltaic
system installation and given basic instructions,
commissioning, and operations & maintenance of
major components, schematics, and drawings, the
Photovoltaic (PV) systems. It is important to note that the
NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional
will: specify, adapt, implement, configure, install,
tasks outlined in this JTA apply to a range of installation
inspect, and maintain any type of photovoltaic
personnel including but not limited to: installers; project
system, including grid-connected and stand-alone
systems with or without battery storage, that meet
managers; installation foreman/supervisor, and designers.
the performance and reliability needs of customers
The common thread among these individuals is that they
in the United States and Canada, by ensuring quality
craftsmanship and compliance with all applicable
will need to be fully conversant with and able to apply the
codes, standards, and safety requirements.
knowledge areas contained in this document.
This JTA reflects the changes inherent in the growth and maturity of the solar industry over the last 5 years.
It is important to note that while the range of personnel that holds responsible roles in the PV installation
industry has evolved, the basic knowledge areas contained in the JTA remain fairly constant.
This task list assumes the NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional (PVIP) starts with a system design
package, complete with major components, manufacturer installation manuals, system schematics, and
assembly and troubleshooting instructions. Even if the NABCEP Certified PVIP was responsible for the design
of the system, this JTA begins with the step of verifying the accuracy of the design. Likewise, if the personnel
did not design the system, he or she must be fully knowledgeable about systems design because they may be
required to adapt the design to fit a particular application or customer need.
The tasks described in this JTA were developed based on conventional designs, equipment, and practice
used in the industry today; they do not seek to limit or restrict innovative equipment, designs, or installation
practice. As with any developing technology, it is fully expected that the skills required of the practitioner will
develop and change over time as new materials, techniques, codes, and standards evolve.
Pg. 2 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 2 ---

Task Steps and Knowledge in
Each Category Level
Scope of Job Task Analysis
NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professionals (PVIP)
work in a variety of responsible roles on PV installation
jobs. They fulfill a decision-making role that helps ensure
the quality and serviceability of the PV installation.
The scope of the JTA is such that Certified PVIPs
fill a wide range of job positions within the industry,
taking responsibility for installations of varying size
and complexity. As such, the scope of their duties may
vary considerably. Due to the range of responsibilities
and skills that may fall within the scope of a NABCEP
Certified PVIP’s job duties, this Job Task Analysis is
broad in scope: not all certificants will perform all the
tasks described.
It is expected that all individuals who achieve NABCEP
PV Installation Professional Certification will be familiar
with and capable of executing all the tasks described.
Content Domains
Content Domain Percentage of Examination
System Design ............................................................................................................................................................................32%
Installation ...................................................................................................................................................................................38%
System Commissioning .............................................................................................................................................................17%
Operations & Maintenance .......................................................................................................................................................13%
Pg. 3 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 3 ---

CATEGORIZATION OF TASK STEPS USED BY
PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION PROFESSIONALS
Domain I: System Design
Task 1: Review customer expectations
Knowledge of:
a. Equipment location
b. Aesthetic concerns
c. Electric loads assessment (e.g., new construction, multi-modal and stand-alone systems)
d. System functionality and performance requirements
e. Value engineering
Task 2: Review project criteria
Knowledge of:
a. Authorities having jurisdiction criteria (e.g., codes, standards, covenants, and regulations)
b. Electric service provider criteria (e.g., utilities, co-ops, third-party providers)
c. Construction plan sets and project specification documents
Task 3: Assess project site
Knowledge of:
a. Characteristics of appropriate array locations k. Construction site hazards
b. Characteristics of viable roof surfaces l. Characteristics of appropriate staging/lifting/
c. Live and dead load characteristics of PV arrays access locations
d. Common roof structural design m. Shading analysis tools and techniques
e. Drilling and trenching equipment capabilities n. Azimuth measurement tools
f. Characteristics of appropriate equipment o. Magnetic declination
locations p. Slope tools and techniques
g. Types of electrical services q. Building use and dimensions
h. Point of interconnection r. Effects of wind exposure
i. Raceway installation parameters s. Required site information documentation
j. Effect of obstructions
Pg. 4 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 4 ---

DOMAIN I: SYSTEM DESIGN
Task 4: Configure mechanical design
Knowledge of:
a. PV system performance simulation software g. Existing and allowable loads
b. Basic algebra, geometry, and trigonometry (e.g., snow load, seismic)
calculations (e.g., area, slope, inter-row shading, h. Design principles of ground mount foundations
withdrawal loads) i. Effect of PV module tilt and orientation
c. Characteristics of racking systems j. Characteristics of PV module technologies
d. Fastener selection criteria (e.g., types, sizes) k. Methods for equipment racking and/or installation
e. Structure attachment criteria (e.g., spacing, l. Criteria for placement of energy storage systems
quantity, type) m. Pathways and setbacks (e.g., walkways,
f. Waterproofing and flashing methods and materials clearances, accessibility)
Task 5: Configure electrical design
Knowledge of:
a. Inverter selection criteria (e.g., types of l. Overcurrent protection selection criteria
inverters, DC to AC ratio) m. Electrical enclosure selection criteria
b. String size calculations and layout n. Panelboard selection criteria
c. DC circuit sizing formulas (e.g., PV source and o. Disconnect selection criteria
output circuits, battery cables) p. Grounding system criteria and components
d. AC circuit sizing formulas (e.g., inverter output q. Rapid shutdown equipment and methods
circuit, feeders) r. Arc-fault protection equipment and methods
e. Module level power electronics (MLPE) s. Characteristics of battery technologies
f. Voltage drop calculations t. Characteristics of charge controllers
g. Methods of interconnection (e.g., supply-side u. Characteristics and components of
connection, load-side connection) AC coupled systems
h. Conductor properties and types v. Energy storage system sizing and
i. Raceway selection criteria and calculations performance calculations
j. Raceway installation methods w. Power requirements of auxiliary systems
k. Source circuit combining methods (e.g., combiner (including backup power)
boxes, wire harnesses)
Task 6: Configure system monitoring, control, and communications design
Knowledge of:
a. Monitoring selection criteria (e.g., PV system data, d. Communication methods (e.g., wired, wireless)
consumption data, charging/discharging data) e. Characteristics of building automation systems
b. Automated shutdown (e.g., motorized switches, f. Tracking system controllers
protection relays)
c. Low-voltage wiring methods
Pg. 5 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 5 ---

DOMAIN I: SYSTEM DESIGN
Task 7: Prepare project documentation
Knowledge of: e. Architectural plan requirements (e.g., elevations,
a. Plans included in a complete project plan set street view renderings)
b. Characteristics of electrical diagrams and f. PV system labeling requirements
schematics (e.g., one-line, three-line) g. Permit application package requirements (e.g.,
c. Use and meaning of electrical symbols and terms manufacturer specification sheets)
d. Engineering requirements (e.g., structural,
electrical, civil, geotechnical, environmental)
Task 8: Secure permits and approvals
Knowledge of:
a. Authorities having jurisdiction criteria (e.g., codes, standards, covenants, regulations)
b. Types of inspections (e.g., electrical, structural, environmental)
c. Documentation criteria
d. Electric service provider and interconnection requirements (e.g., equipment locations, clearances)
Task 9: Adapt system design
Knowledge of:
a. Site condition assessment e. Change order process and documentation
b. Design options (e.g., value engineering, alternate f. Authorities having jurisdiction criteria
materials and methods, contingency plans) (e.g., codes, standards, covenants, and regulations)
c. Effect of site conditions on design g. Equipment specifications
d. Document control (e.g., revisions of plan sets from h. Project budget (e.g., time budget, financial budget)
pre-construction to as-built and record drawings)
Skill in:
Interpreting project scope of work
Performing gap analysis for scope of work
Pg. 6 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 6 ---

Domain II: Installation
Task 1: Develop safety plan
Knowledge of:
d. Site hazard assessment
a. OSHA requirements (e.g., fall protection,
e. Material safety data sheet (MSDS)
competent/qualified person, reporting of incidents)
f. Emergency response resources and protocols
b. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association—
g. Weather event response actions
Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace)
h. Specific equipment and training required for site
c. Personal protective equipment (PPE) (e.g., specific
i. Elements of an effective safety meeting
equipment required for project, maintenance of PPE)
Task 2: Safeguard against hazards
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association—Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace)
b. OSHA CFR 29 1926 safety standards
c. Proper care and use of safety equipment (e.g., life cycle, defects, storage)
d. Proper care and use of test equipment (e.g., life cycle, defects, storage)
e. Proper care and use of power tools (e.g., life cycle, defects, storage)
f. Safe work practices
g. Training requirements (e.g. education materials, security clearances, certifications, manufacturer
recommendations)
Skill in:
Effectively implementing the site specific safety plan
Task 3: Install raceways
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and construction specifications for raceways and associated fittings
b. Proper raceway selection and sizing
c. Proper installation and labeling of raceways per NFPA 70/AHJ requirements (e.g., expansion joints,
physical protection)
d. Neat and workmanlike manner of installation of raceways
Skill in:
Confirming raceway routing per plans and client input
Pg. 7 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 7 ---

DOMAIN II: INSTALLATION
Task 4: Install electrical equipment
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and construction specifications for equipment and associated fittings
b. Neat and workmanlike manner of installation of electrical equipment
c. Proper installation and labeling of equipment per NFPA 70 requirements
d. Plan sets and schematics
Skill in:
Confirming equipment suitability and placement per plans and client input
Providing and maintaining access and working space around all electrical equipment
Interpreting construction plans (e.g., electrical plans, schematics, line diagrams)
Task 5: Install DC PV system conductors
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and construction specifications for DC conductors
b. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association—Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace)
c. Appropriate conductor installation and pulling practices
d. Wire management in a neat and workmanlike manner
e. Termination and connection per NFPA 70
Skill in:
Conducting field verification of proper conductor identification, size, color, type, and rating
Properly identifying and labeling DC conductors per plan set and NFPA 70 (NEC) requirements
Conducting string sizing and string configuration per plans and NFPA 70
Task 6: Install AC PV system conductors
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and construction specifications for AC conductors
b. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association—Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace)
c. Appropriate conductor installation and pulling practices
d. Wire management in a neat and workmanlike manner
e. Termination and connection per NFPA 70
Skill in:
Conducting field verification of proper conductor identification, size, color, type, and rating
Properly identifying and labeling AC conductors per plan set and NFPA 70 requirements
Pg. 8 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 8 ---

DOMAIN II: INSTALLATION
Task 7: Install grounding and bonding systems
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation,
and construction specifications for grounding
and bonding
b. Proper installation of bonding and bonding jumpers
c. Grounding systems and certifications (e.g., UL
2703, integrated bonding)
Skill in:
Conducting field verification of existing grounding electrode systems
Installing proper system grounding per NFPA 70 and manufacturer specifications (grounding electrode conductor [GEC])
Installing proper equipment grounding per NFPA 70 and manufacturer specifications (equipment grounding conductor [EGC])
Task 8: Complete utility interconnection point
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and construction specifications for utility interconnection
b. OSHA safety standards
c. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association—Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace)
d. Calculation and verification of OCPD overcurrent protection device (OCPD) and disconnecting means
e. Effective and efficient communication regarding shutdown and inspection processes
f. Proper termination of conductors per NFPA 70
g. Local electric service provider requirements for interconnection
h. Methods of interconnection
Skill in:
Effectively implementing the site-specific safety plan
Interpreting design and construction documents
Task 9: Install system monitoring, control, and communication hardware
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and d. Termination and connection per NFPA 70
construction specifications
b. Neat and workmanlike installation of
monitoring equipment
c. Types and methods of data communication hardware
Skill in:
Confirming monitoring equipment placement per plans and with client
Conducting field verification of final system configuration
Conducting field verification of proper cable identification, size, type, and rating
Installing equipment per NFPA 70 and approved plan sets
Preparing monitoring system for commissioning
Pg. 9 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 9 ---

DOMAIN II: INSTALLATION
Task 10: Install battery equipment
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) articles for use, installation, and e. Neat and workmanlike manner of installation of
construction specifications for batteries battery equipment
b. OSHA safety standards f. Proper conductor installation, routing,
c. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association— identification, size, color, type, and rating
Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace) g. Proper battery handling, storage, future
d. Proper installation of batteries and battery equipment maintenance, and installation techniques
(e.g., labeling, spill kits, enclosure, ventilation)
Skill in:
Implementing the site-specific safety plan
Confirming battery equipment placement per plans and client input
Installing batteries and battery-related equipment per NFPA 70
Conducting field verification of proper conductor identification, size, color, type, and rating
Task 11: Install ground-mounted structure
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70 (NEC) h. Environmental impact (e.g., protected species,
b. Authorities having jurisdiction criteria (e.g., water management)
codes, standards, zoning, covenants, regulations) i. Site protection and restoration (e.g., straw and seed)
c. OSHA safety standards j. Equipment requirement and availabilities
d. Foundation and structural elements
(e.g., geotechnical requirements)
e. Construction and assembly of PV structure
and racking
f. Neat and workmanlike manner of installation
g. Location of underground utilities (e.g., call ahead,
underground locator services)
Skill in:
Managing excavation to design specifications (e.g., trenching, piers, foundations)
Interpreting design and construction documents (e.g. site plan, system design plan)
Pg. 10 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 10 ---

DOMAIN II: INSTALLATION
Task 12: Install building-mounted system
Knowledge of:
a. Authorities having jurisdiction criteria (e.g., codes, f. Neat and workmanlike manner of installation
standards, zoning, covenants, regulations) g. Types of roofing system construction
b. OSHA safety standards (e.g., fall protection, h. Lightning protection systems
hoisting, scaffolding) i. Staging materials and equipment (e.g., roof or
c. Mounting surface compositions (e.g., tile, other structure loading, security)
composite, membrane, metal) j. Waterproofing building penetrations
d. Mounting surface and structure protection k. Equipment requirements and availabilities
and restoration
e. Array layouts per location (e.g., inter-row
shading, electrical efficiency)
Skill in:
Effectively implementing the site-specific safety plan
Interpreting and applying approved design (e g., engineered drawings, manufacturer specifications)
Installing points of attachment to roof manufacturer requirements
Task 13: Install PV modules
Knowledge of:
a. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association— e. Proper wire management methods and materials
Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace) f. Termination and connection per NFPA 70
b. OSHA safety standards (e.g., fall protection, g. Grounding and bonding (e.g., integrated
ladder use, lifting) grounding, bonding washers, lugs)
c. Neat and workmanlike manner of installation h. Regional considerations (e.g., animal guarding, ice
(e.g., coplanar, square) and snow, wind)
d. Proper module handling and preparation
Skill in:
Effectively implementing the site-specific safety plan
Conducting field verification of equipment selection (e.g., nameplate, racking compatibility)
Interpreting design and construction documents
Pg. 11 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 11 ---

Domain III: System Commissioning
Task 1: Review or develop commissioning protocol
Knowledge of:
a. Applicable standards (e.g., manufacturer recommendations, building system,
IEC 62446-1, performance testing)
b. NFPA 70E (National Fire Protection Association—Standard for Electrical Safety in the Workplace)
c. Project-specific requirements
d. Test equipment
Task 2: Complete visual and mechanical inspection
Knowledge of:
a. Project design
b. Manufacturer requirements
c. NEC and local AHJ requirements
d. Electric service provider requirements (e.g., disconnecting means, interconnection method,
equipment location, labeling requirements)
Skill in:
Verifying installation per project design and requirements
Task 3: Conduct mechanical tests
Knowledge of:
a. Installation per torque specifications
b. Field testing (e.g., pile load tests, soil test, concrete slump test)
c. Witness testing (e.g., module wind or snow loading)
Task 4: Conduct electrical tests
Knowledge of:
a. Proper use of diagnostic tools
(e.g., multimeter, insulation resistance tester) g. Continuity testing
b. Insulation resistance testing h. Ground resistance test
c. Polarity testing i. Wire termination torque verification
d. DC string open circuit voltage (Voc) testing j. AC voltage testing
e. DC string maximum power current (Imp) testing k. Witness testing (e.g., functionality of relay,
f. DC string short circuit (Isc) testing communication to utility, anti-islanding)
Pg. 12 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 12 ---

DOMAIN III: SYSTEM COMMISSIONING
Task 5: Verify system operation
Knowledge of:
a. Startup procedure
b. Acceptance test and/or performance verification test
c. Impact of site conditions on testing (e.g., cell temperature readings, plane of array irradiance, power output)
d. Proper use and calibration requirements of testing equipment
Skill in:
Programming system electronics (e.g., charge controller set points, firmware updates,
monitoring system connection, inverter)
Calculating expected electrical parameters and comparing to measured values
Task 6: Confirm project completion
Knowledge of:
a. Finalized documentation (e.g., commission report, e. Warranty and owner’s documents (e.g., manuals,
signed permits, permission to operate [PTO], specification sheets, signed permits)
photographs) f. Equipment identification requirements
b. Visual documentation (e.g. photograph, thermal (e.g., labeling, tags, signage)
image, screen shot) g. Operation instructions and/or training for owner
c. Close-out procedures (e.g., punch lists, contract h. Warranty terms and coverage
reconciliation, demobilization) i. System design, operation, and performance
d. Owner-signoff requirements (e.g., appropriate metrics (e.g., performance ratio)
site addition, customer satisfaction)
Task 7: Orient end user to system
Knowledge of:
a. Safe startup, operation, and shutdown procedures
b. Emergency procedures
c. Location of components
d. Monitoring access
Skill in:
Explaining system operation and limitations (e.g., training, operational indicators)
Reviewing system and project documentation with end user
Pg. 13 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 13 ---

Domain IV: Operations & Maintenance (O&M)
Task 1: Verify system operation and performance
Knowledge of:
a. Access to system monitoring, control, and f. Site weather data source
communications platform(s) g. Climate data and impact on performance
b. Platform settings and alert mechanisms h. Data monitoring system capabilities and
c. Indicators of failure, underperformance, instrumentation quality
or false alarms i. Performance analytics (e.g., trends)
d. Interpretation of performance data j. Remote diagnostics solutions (if available)
e. Seasonal impacts on system performance
Task 2: Perform preventive maintenance
Knowledge of:
a. OSHA safety regulations l. Module failure points and causes (e.g., signs of
b. O&M practices and causes of failure overheating, damage to J-Box, discoloration)
c. Maintenance schedule criteria m. Electrical equipment failure points and causes
d. NFPA 70E (e.g., lock-out/tag-out) (e.g., vermin, debris, ventilation, water intrusion)
e. Site-specific safety requirements n. Wiring system degredation, failure points, and causes
f. Site-specific O&M procedure (e.g., unsupported conductors, connector failure,
g. Appropriate testing, equipment, and loose terminations, physical damage to raceway)
documentation required o. Battery system degredation, failure points, and
h. Startup/shutdown procedures causes (e.g., cable terminations, corrosion,
i. Periodic visual and mechanical inspection capacity testing, deformation of battery)
j. Instrumentation calibration p. Site factors affecting performance (e.g., module
k. Mounting system degredation, failure points soiling, vegetation impacts, shading)
and causes (e.g., loose connections, corrosion, q. Array testing (e.g., Voc, Isc, Imp, fuse continuity testing)
displacement) r. Comparison of whole system performance to
predicted values
Task 3: Perform corrective maintenance
Knowledge of:
a. OSHA regulations f. Startup/shutdown procedures
b. Troubleshooting procedures g. Methods of repair or replacement
c. NFPA 70E (e.g., lock-out/tag-out, personal h. Field modification and equipment substitution
protective equipment [PPE]) i. System cleaning (e.g., snow removal,
d. Site-specific safety requirements dust/pollen removal)
e. Methods for diagnosing failure or low performance
(e.g., multimeter, monitoring system, thermal imager)
Skill in:
Verifying effectiveness of corrective measures
Pg. 14 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 14 ---

NABCEP’s mission is to establish and operate high quality credentialing
programs for renewable energy professionals. NABCEP credentials promote
worker safety, provide value to practitioners and consumers, and set the
standard for measurable cognitive skill levels.
NABCEP’s PVIP and SHI Certifications are North America’s only
renewable energy personnel certification that has been ANSI accredited
to the internationally recognized ISO/IEC 17024 standard.
NABCEP wishes to acknowledge and thank the following individuals for their contribution in developing these JTAs:
Beth Copanas James Hasslebeck Doug Sabetti
Greg Demarse Bob Hattier Phil Schneider
Kevin Flaws Dell Jones Rob Smith
Chris Giannoumis Jeff Laukhart Bob Solger
Jeff Gilbert Ernie Pritchard Andy Walker
Mark Gillespie Cathy Redson
North American Board of Certified Energy Practitioners
56 Clifton Country Road, Suite 202 Clifton Park, NY 12065
800-654-0021 / info@nabcep.org / www.nabcep.org
Pg. 15 NABCEP Certified PV Installation Professional Job Task Analysis v.December 2017

--- PAGE 15 ---